Segment 1:
Hi there, Car Guy here. Today we are going to cover the basics, the basic parts of an engine. I get a lot of requests on engines and how they're put together and what the little parts are on the inside and what they do. I plan to cover that today. I'm not necessarily going to get into a lot of theory. But I have this Integra engine, which you may recognize from the oil pressure video that just kind of sitting here. And I'm just kind of sitting here. So rather than sitting here, I thought, man, why don't I think about those people that watch my videos and get them something that they asked for. So let's give you something you asked for. We're just going to point and name the parts. How's that? First we'll start with this.
Segment 2:
This is a motor. It's a starter motor. Motor. This is a 1. 8 liter Honda engine. It was in a 1990 Acura Integra. It is not a motor, it is an engine. Of course, if you use the word motor, yeah, people are going to know what you're talking about, but technically you would be wrong. Engine is actually short for ingenious device. Motor is actually something that represents an electrical component. So this is not technically a motor, this is an engine.
Segment 3:
This is the valve cover. Under the valve cover we have the camshafts. This is a dual overhead Cam engine. Not every engine is designed this way. There are lots and lots of different engine designs. Everything from these traditional 4 stroke types to let's say the Rotary types that you might find in a Mazda. Those are fun. That engine started out as a water pump. With this dual overhead Cam system you have two camshafts each controlling a different function. This one is the exhaust camshaft and this controls all of the exhaust valves. This is the intake camshaft and it controls all of the intake valves. We know this is the intake because the intake manifold is on this side and we can see the flow of air into the engine. We know this is the exhaust side because these are the exhaust valves and leads out to the exhaust manifold of the engine.
Segment 4:
This is a camshaft or sometimes referred to. As a bump stick. Why bumps?These are the Cam lobes. Now this really is everything because this says how this engine is going to breathe. This tells it when to open the valves, how long to keep the valves open for, and how far to open them. That is huge because that is, like I said, directly proportional to how the engine breathes. So if you want to change an engine's behavior, you want more horsepower, less horsepower, you want more torque, you want more fuel economy. All these things come down to this guy right here, and they all have to happen at a given time. Hence the reason we have timing gears on them so that everything works together. While editing this, I believe I came up with an even better analogy for a camshaft. Think of the camshaft as a computer program, a mechanical computer program for the engine. So whenever you're thinking of camshafts, think of them as mechanical computer programs because they dictate the behavior of the engine and how it breathes. These Cam lobes as they spin around push onto these followers on this particular engine, and in turn they open the valves. This engine uses these followers, so the camshaft pushes on this. Which takes its leverage from here and then pushes down. This is actually the valve. This is an exhaust valve. So what this little thing does is it sits down inside of here and every time the camshaft comes around it pushes down on these, thus opening the exhaust valves. You have them all the way across for each one of the exhaust valves and this this engine has two valves per cylinder on the exhaust side and two valves per cylinder. On the intake side, it's a 4 cylinder so 4 * 4 is 16, so it's a 16 valve dual overhead Cam engine. Once again, lots of different engine designs and a pushrod engine. You have lifters, so you'll have either solid or hydraulic lifters. Hydraulic lifters means that this guy's filled with oil and that this little thing in the in the middle here will squish down a little bit and these allow for quieter operation of the engine. But. With a solid valve train, you actually have more accurate valve timing because this is like a squishy sponge. A solid valve train is exactly that. It's going to open the valve precisely. These are not so precise, but mostly used in passenger cars to keep, you know the the services down because with solid valves you have to adjust them periodically. With hydraulic lifters you do not. This is a push rod and the push rod sits inside of that little. Cup there on the lifter and every time the Cam comes around, I realize this is not the Cam for this car. But every time the Cam comes around, what it does is it pushes up on that lifter and opens the valve. It doesn't. Kind of a roundabout way. That's why overhead Cam engines came about.
Segment 5:
This is the intake camshaft and this is the exhaust. And if you look at the bumps, they're a little different. One's a little higher than the other, maybe a little fatter. But the point is, is these things are angled and put in just the right position so that they can activate the valves. And we want to do this. Once again, so that we make the engine breathe back of the intake camshaft has that little slot that just drives the distributor. So the distributor is mechanically connected to the camshaft. So if the camshaft is out of time, the distributor is too. Keep that in mind if you're doing timing belts and things aren't running right afterwards.
Segment 6:
This is an old school distributor and this. No rotor here, but what this does is this is mechanically connected to the camshaft and driven by the camshaft. And what it does is it transfers the spark to each one of the cylinders as the cylinder comes up on its compression stroke. So this is mechanically timed to the engine via that gear which. Is in many cases spline to the camshaft. This is not the correct camshaft, but this is what turns it. So if you take one of these out you have to make sure you put it back in in the right place, your engines not going to run right.
Segment 7:
This is an old school oil pump. It bolts to the block and there's that little area right in here that is driven by a long shaft actually many times is run off the distributor, so the distributor in the oil pump. Are often sort of tied together by this rod that connects the two. So the camshaft also drives the oil pump. Something to keep in mind. So if your camshaft isn't running and you don't have oil pressure, you may have a problem with the connection between these two.
Segment 8:
Here we have the exhaust manifold. This is the dipstick for the oil goes down into the oil pan. Each one of these is a runner that comes out. Of each cylinder. So each cylinder has its own runner. They all collect inside of the manifold. Things that collect things are called manifolds. You have the intake manifold in the back and then you have the exhaust manifold. Here these runners are all the same length. Reason for this is is as the engine runs it sends out pulses on each cylinder individually at different times and each pulse actually helps draw out the next pulse from the next cylinder. So they all need to be the same length so that each cylinder can produce equal power.
Segment 9:
You hear the term equal length headers. It's kind of what they're talking about. It's something that you need in the design of the engine. If not, it won't run smoothly. So you want all these pieces of metal, no matter how you bend them, to be roughly the same. Like when they reach the point where they all come together, there's your exhaust manifold. You say all four of those holes collect down into that one big hole exhaust manifold, in case you were wondering. If you take that plug out, it empties out the coolant inside the block. I feel like I should have talked about this first, but the camshafts sit up here and keep the top part of the engine in time. The crankshaft is down here and this. Keeps the bottom half of the engine in time. And these things are normally connected by a timing belt. And the water pump lives here, which is driven by the timing belt. So, and this, this is the tension, it keeps tension on the belt. But there's a belt that connects the crankshaft with the camshafts. It's called the timing belt because that's what it does. It keeps the engine in time, It keeps the valves opening and closing. In time with the Pistons moving up and down, which is the crankshaft which we're about to get to. The water pump of course moves water throughout the engine. Other engines this is an older V8 set up use a timing chain and this upper big gear here would be connected to the camshaft and a lower one here will be connected to the crankshaft and the reason this gear is bigger. For every one revolution of the camshaft you have two revolutions of the crankshaft and the reason for this is, is it's the four stroke engine cycle. So it's designed in such a way to where every time the camshaft goes around once, the crankshaft has gone around twice. Kind of cool huh?You may also hear the term double roller timing chain which refers to this which is 2 chains put together which is really stronger. In addition to that, you might hear of gear driven setups which are more accurate but also noisy. You can put these in place of regular chains and some engines are just gear driven from the start. I've seen a lot of diesels this way.
Segment 10:
This is the intake manifold. Just like the exhaust manifold, it has different runners going into each one of the cylinders that are all the same length. Air comes in here goes down through these runners, each one of these. Goes down through each one of these runners and each corresponding cylinder intake manifolds. I'm not going to get into the principles right now, but intake manifolds that have long narrow runners are usually good for torque, well are made for for low end torque, whereas like say short runners that are big and fat that is made for high RPM horsepower. What happens with these long narrow runners is they help increase the velocity of the air going into the cylinder. And an unnaturally aspirated engine. It helps increase torque. Conversely, when these are big open areas, they allow the engine to draw in more air at a higher RPM, which in turn gives it more power. These across here are all of your fuel injectors Anyway. These little fuel injectors sit underneath what is called the fuel rail which supplies pressurized fuel. Behind the injectors themselves. Then what happens is each one of these injectors will spray into the individual cylinders at the correct time according to the computer. It uses all the different sensors on there such as Cam and crank sensors to know exactly where the piston is to know that the intake valve is open and each one of these provides a little squirt. So in this case in the case of a fuel injected engine, you have air all the way to this point, then fuel is added at the last second. While the intake valve is open carbureted engine, there's air and fuel in each one of these individual runners going down into here. This orange stuff here is all gasket, so that's the intake gasket. It seals well what would be EGR here and coolant goes through here. We'll check it out. There's the valves, these are the intake valves and they're both closed right now because there's no camshaft in there. One on that side and 1:00 on that side. Notice how this area in here is all clean. That's where the gasoline gets sprayed. So the air goes in. Every place else is kind of carboned up. The shape of this is very important because the air, air moves like liquid, so you want it to flow in here and as these valves open up into the cylinder, they allow that air and fuel to pass into it. And what you're looking at here at the top is actually the valve guide, and that's the valve itself. Let's see if we can pop one of those out in a minute. And here is the exhaust side, which has kind of the same thing, but instead of stuff coming in, stuff's coming out. So this is the beginning of your exhaust system, that brown, crusty stuff that's burned oil.
Segment 11:
This is the cylinder head. Between the cylinder head and the block, you have the head gasket. These are dowels that guide where the head gasket goes. But this head gasket's just fine. There's nothing wrong with it. What you'll see here is the combustion chamber, or at least part of it. These come in all different shapes and sizes. Some of you out there may be familiar with the term hemi. Which actually stands for hemispherical. This is what do they call this?A pented roof pentaroof design. But the hemisphere design is like the inside of a sphere in here. So this this is spherical inside the combustion chamber. That's where that term hemi comes from. It's hemispherical. This I believe is called a pentaroof design because. It goes up and comes down at a sharp angle, as you can see on each one of these. The design of this, the angle of these valves, all of these things way into how the engine performs, every little nuance, every little measurement, right down to the thousandths of a millimeter. All of this comes into play with an engine. So engineers spend a great deal of time designing the shape of this, designing how big these valves are going to be, everything else, all to come together so that the engine works. Within a certain range, certain parameters. And in the case of an automotive engine, they're trying to balance between fuel economy and power. It's it's that simple. It's not an easy thing to do. But the people that are good at it, good for them.
Segment 12:
This this is the top of the valve. This is the valve spring, and these are the keepers. There's two of them that hold in the valve. Here is your valve spring. Here's the the retainer. And these are the keepers. But these actually sit down inside of this groove and they're tapered. As you can see, they have a taper to them, fatter at the top, and they are at the bottom, and they sit down inside here and grab on to the top of the valve. So they sit in there and because this hole is tapered, they're wedged in and they just, they just wedge together. And on the inside of these keepers there's a groove, and you see there and that groove sits in the top of the valve right here. So that holds it all together. Seems kind of cheesy, but it stays together for the most part. But what I just removed here is an exhaust valve. And as you can see, it's kind of crusty, got a little bit of little bit of oil on it. So that valve seal may have been leaking a little bit, but it's probably more likely that the rings on this engine are worn out because it's got quite a few miles on it now, the shiny spot. Is called the seat or the shiny spot of the valve. Is where the valve contacts the valve seat, which is here the cylinder head. So this area here needs to seal against this area of the valve. Whenever a valve job is done, this seat is cleaned up, sometimes at many different angles, sometimes they grind in the seat up to five different angles, 5 different sides of stones. But they have a special tool that fits down in this valve guide and grinds this hole in such a way to where it will seat up against. This valve ceiling is very important in an engine, especially in the combustion chamber. Any leaks cause compression loss, and any compression loss causes power loss. But that's the basics of how a valve stays inside of a head held in there by keepers. Well, valve springs are also very important because after the camshaft compresses them and opens the valve, it's the job of the valve spring to close the valve again, and it's equally important that the valve closes as efficiently as it opens. So valve springs are important in that they need to be able to combat the forces that are going against them, and they need to rapidly reexpand to close the valve. If not, it's something called valve float. To where the spring or that the speed of the valve overcomes the ability for the spring to close the valve. In fact, right here is probably the number one limiting factor of RPM. High RPM engines have really good valve springs that are able to close the valves once they're open, but you got to think if something is moving at 10, 000 revolutions per minute, which is really super fast. If something is, if this spring has to compress and decompress. And that amount of time, which is milliseconds, it's not able to keep up. The stronger these are the more stress it's going to put on the Cam and the and the whole valve train. But the if they're too weak then what happens is they won't be able to close the valves and the valves will stay open. And if the valve stays open then you lose compression and you lose power and it starts to miss and have issues there now in this engine.
Segment 13:
This is the valve seal and these are positive type valve seals, meaning that they slip over the top of the valve guide itself and the valve guide is basically a metal sleeve that this is sitting on top of that the valve rides in and out of. OK, here's one of those valve seals and this is referred to as a positive type valve seal and the reason is is because it positively locks onto. The top of the valve guide.
Segment 14:
If you have bad valve seals, a lot of times it will suck the oil well on the intake side. Mostly it will suck the oil from inside the cylinder head down inside the combustion chamber and this is not a good thing. These positive type valve seals however are very good at keeping the oil out. Some valve seals are just what are called umbrella seals and they just sit on the inside of the. Valve and don't make a positive seal here at the valve stone. They really look like an umbrella to help keep this out. If the valve guide gets worn out and the space between the valve guide and the valve gets too big, it will suck more oil in there, which will cause you to burn more oil. But I'm of the opinion that most of the oil consumption actually happens in the bottom of the engine because that's where most of the pressure is. Let's go there next, right?Now let's get a look at the crankshaft. Oh, by the way, this is a flywheel. This is a manual transmission. So when you have a manual transmission, this is a weighted thing. It's called a flywheel. If this were an automatic transmission, this is a thin plate, and it's referred to as a flex plate, not a flywheel. Flywheels are on manual transmissions. Flex plates are on automatics. This is a flex plate. As you can see, it's much thinner and lighter. But these are for automatic transmissions. The thick ones that are heavy are flywheels. This is referred to as a flex plate. So what does it look like as your engine runs?
Segment 15:
All I'm doing is turning the flywheel so 4 cylinder engine fires every 180 degrees. So as both of these are up, watch the four stroke engine cycle to see more stuff on this. But as both of these Pistons are up, one of them is on the compression stroke and about to fire and go on the power stroke, and the other is on the exhaust stroke. There's something called sister cylinders, and it has to do with the crankshaft design in the way this whole system is set up. That's what that means. That's why two of these are always coming up at the same time. Same with these middle two sister cylinders. Cool, huh? All right, now let's flip this guy over. No, you're going to be dumping oil all over the place. Not too worried. Let's take the oil paint off.
Segment 16:
This is the oil pickup. So as the engine runs, oil gets sucked up in here by the oil pump, which is this assembly on the front of the crankshaft and is driven by the crankshaft. This metal plate is referred to as a. Windage tray, so and some of these are actually designed to actually scrape a small amount of oil off of the crankshaft as it rotates to help it be more efficient. Oil pickup got a little screen down in there so if the it'll help keep out any big chunks, I'm getting sucked up in there. But it goes to the oil filter also, that's the reason why you have it on there so. There's any dirt or anything in here. It should get caught up by the oil filter or the screen. It could be said that this is where the rubber meets the road, because in essence, what an internal combustion engine does is it turns the chemical engine.
Segment 17:
It it turns the chemical energy inside of the gasoline into mechanical energy. And that happens right here at the crankshaft. These are counterweights. These are connecting rods. These are directly connected to the Pistons. In fact we're going to take one of those Pistons out of here now. But as it rotates and with a with a 4 cylinder engine, it's hard to keep it balanced. So what they often do is they have these harmonic balancers. There's a little piece of rubber that is in between the inside and outside of this pulley and the reason for that. Is because every time a piston pushes down and causes this to rotate, it creates a pulse. But that pulse pretty much ends when it gets to the end of its travel, and then it has to compress something, so it goes from accelerating to decelerating, accelerating to decelerating. And this creates pulses of power here at the flywheel in the crankshaft to help even that out so that it doesn't shatter itself, because believe it or not. Those pulses are not good for the metal parts inside the engine. This is called a harmonic balancer or a damper, because that's exactly what it does, is this helps dampen those accelerating and decelerating forces that happen at the crankshaft. This guy right here is actually more important than you might think. This is what it looks like rotating from below. You got these, the connecting rods that are connecting to the Pistons coming up, and they're all transferring power to their respective journals. And transferring it here to the back of the engine. So when they say power at the flywheel, like 140 horses at the flywheel, this is what they mean that this has enough twisting force. Horsepower is actually derived from torque and torque is a twisting force. So really torque tells you more about an engine than anything else. But torque equates more torque equates to more twisting force, more of the engine's ability to push down bigger cylinders. And other factors contribute to an engine that can have more torque, Camshaft design being one of them. I'm not going to take the crankshaft out and I'm sorry to say, but I will.
Segment 18:
This is the your last thing. I'm I am going to take one of the connecting rods out and here is the bearing cap. You might remember this from the oil pressure video and that bearing is not looking so great, but see the bearings. Have these little tabs on them and they fit down into these little slots here on the caps. So you just sliding down into place like this so they fit in there all nice. This journal right here has to be completely round. It's really important. It also has to be nice and shiny and smooth because this is where the power is transferred. You want it to happen smoothly. OK, see a piston being born? All right, tada, we have in our hands a piston. This is the hole that was left by the cylinder. Now this normally should have a cross hatch pattern on the inside of it because that helps the ring seal and the oil control rings work.
Segment 19:
But there is the crankshaft journal and think of the crankshaft like pedals on a bicycle and each one of the Pistons are like legs pedaling the crankshaft. So it works in very similar way here is piston. It's fairly light, actually. This one's still nice and stiff, but that's it for these that make up the displacement. So when you hear 1. 8 liter, like in the case of this engine, that means the volume between all four of these cylinders and Pistons comes out to be 1. 8 liters of displacement. That's how much air this displaces. Shiny spot right here is called the skirt. 3 little screws up here.
Segment 20:
The first one with a little WAVY plate in it, that is the oil control ring. Then you have two compression rings. You have this compression ring and this compression ring. So an engine or a piston normally has these two compression rings and an oil control ring. So when people say they're re ringing the engine or putting new rings in, that's what they're talking about is those piston rings because these guys. Are the things that seal against the inside of the cylinder.
Segment 21:
This right here is the wrist pin and this allows the connecting rod, which is this part to pivot powers transferred as this piston comes down. You see it has to change direction as it moves up and down on the crankshaft, a little dense in the top for the valves when they come down, so sometimes the valve is really that close. When it opens up and the piston is all the way up, so that's what those little crews are for. So the Pistons all the way up, those little valves come in like that and that is pretty much your engine. And then there's these little holes once again where the whole oil pressure thing that is actually forced out this other little hole which lubricates the bottom of this area in here, so this.
Segment 22:
Will squirt up and throw oil up under the bottom of the piston, which helps one keep it cool because you got to think it's really hot on this side of the piston in the combustion chamber. It's like over 2000 degrees in some cases, but they're getting rid of that heat with the cooling system. That's why the cooling system is so important. An engine turns the chemical energy from your gasoline into mechanical energy here at the piston and the crankshaft. That's what it does. One other really scary part. It's only 20% efficient. 80% of the heat that's generated by the chemical energy of the gasoline is lost through friction and other things, other loss of motion. It's not very efficient to take a piston and move it up and down three times in order to get one thing of power out of it. It's really not that efficient. But the internal combustion engine is not really that great. We've got it to a point where it's about as good as I think it's going to be because we've got combustion down to a science. But still, you can't fight physics. At the end of the day, this is an extremely efficient, what inefficient way to make power. It works, It's common. It's cheap. Efficient. No, not so much. I'm going to cover more specifics to this stuff at some point in time, but this once again, just a general video. Just a video to say these are the parts inside the engine. This is what they do. If I miss something, or if you have something to add, feel free to add it in the comments. But come on, be nice. Some of you out there are kind of uptight. I'm here to learn just like you, and I am learning just like you. But this is what I know are the internal components of the engine and how they work, and I hope this information was helpful to you. You can always visit me at ericcarguy. com or you can visit me at Facebook and Twitter. Oh yeah, and then I'm also doing podcast on Sundays at noon Eastern Standard Time. Which you can find a link to that also on my website. So feel free to do all those things if you so desire. Thank you for subscribing and if you haven't subscribed, hey why not. Be safe, have fun and of course stay dirty. See you people.
Segment 23:
Did you know that there's actually an order in which a house needs to be built and it actually matters?Otherwise, you can train wreck the entire process and everybody involved. Let's dig in. So we've all heard phrases like the rough in or the rough in inspection or trim out or make ready. Some people will use. There's all kinds of different terms all over the country for different phases of construction, so I figured I would talk about how a home. Should be constructed how they're typically constructed from the very beginning to the end. So if you're a builder or you're maybe a Superintendent or something like that and you're trying to figure out when you should be in to do certain things or whether you should call people in to do stuff, in what order, at least you've got some kind of frame of reference of how it's done out in the field by all of us professionals.
Segment 24:
So the first thing that always gets done to a site is what we call site prep. Site prep is really where they will move earth a little bit. They'll try to flatten a surface and get a building ready. They'll get the site ready for a slab to be poured or for something to go up on pure and beam. But they're just prepping the entire site or the entire property. Usually during this phase they're going to have all of the MEP is the mechanical, electrical and plumbing in to do all of their underground work. So this would mean getting many excavators in and digging trenches and getting all of our underground conduit. Maybe from like a transformer over on one side of the property run all the way over to where the service location is going to be. Or for larger homes you may have multiple different buildings or things you might have different panels going in different places. So you might actually dig trenches to get power run from one panel over to another panel to a garage, something like that. Or if you have floor plugs, or if you have an island in your kitchen, all of that stuff, all of that work needs to be done before that slab gets poured. So you don't have to have guys in there just sitting there chipping stuff out with jackhammers or chipping hammers, because that's a ridiculous amount of time wasted when you could have just prepped it all beforehand. So the site prep phase usually is where all of the underground utilities are being brought in. So that they can start a slab.
Segment 25:
The next phase is the slab. This is when you're going to have a bunch of people out there that are going to frame up the structure of the slab. There's going to be a plan, very precise, where everything has to go, how far off the property it needs to go, clear from any trees, things like that. They're going to start putting rebar in as a structure, so once they fill it with concrete, that rebar holds rigidity to the structure. So you can't. Crack and break all of that concrete once the concrete has cured.
Segment 26:
So during that phase, there's also a time when electricians have to come out because we have to ground our slab, meaning we actually have to run a conductor and attach it to all of the rebar that's inside of that slab. There's a whole bunch of different methods of how we can ground a home, what has to be considered a grounding electrode, but a Euphor ground is a thing that we will ground a slab with and make sure that we've got a certain. Kind of conductor that's run inside of the slab that's hooked up to the rebar so that pretty much all of that rebar becomes one huge earth electrode.
Segment 27:
Now typically at this point, this is where you're going to start bringing in temporary power or temporary utilities. Sometimes you might have temporary water because if people need to have water on a site and there's no water around, plumbers are going to have to come in and bring some kind of temporary water that can be used for construction. The same thing with the electricians. Electricians have to come in, they have to create. It's something called a T pole or a temporary pole, and it's usually a preconstructed pole that could be, I don't know, maybe 16 feet long. But typically we're talking about just a large pole that we put a huge disconnect and a huge meter on. And maybe we'll put a panel with some receptacles, all of this stuff on this pole. And we'll set this thing up at the corner of a job site so that every trade has access to power. They can bring electrical cords in, plug things in, bring them in, cut, have saws. All kinds of stuff like that. But we're providing temporary power for construction and that temporary power is going to go away once we actually get permanent power to the building. So it's just a temporary time that it's going to be there.
Segment 28:
But this needs to be done very, very early. So usually around the time that the slab is being poured, sometimes before, sometimes after, just depends on what the needs of the jobs are. But you don't want people out there on this site trying to do construction and they don't have power and they need it because then they can't. Move things forward and then you're holding up this entire job. Now with temporary power, a lot of times comes temporary lighting. So if you're doing a remodel, which you've got like an existing building that you're gutting things out, you're cutting power, you need to have some kind of temporary lighting in there as well. So we'll string up lights everywhere just to keep light going for the construction process. But usually on a brand new structure, we're not doing that unless it's a structure that doesn't have a lot of windows and we do need to provide some lighting just so people. And see and keep going with construction.
Segment 29:
Now for that power to be established, you're going to have to place that pole according to whatever your power company's guidelines are or whatever authority that has jurisdiction area. So like here in the City of Austin, City of Austin is a government organization. They are the people that have the authority to tell us how power poles need to be built or temporary poles need to be constructed we have to have. A grounding electrode that you know, ground rod essentially that we drive into the ground. We have to have a ground coming out, certain number, a certain size. Our meter can only be a certain height off of the ground. It can't be too high, can't be too low, has to be a certain type of meter. They want it approved for the city of Austin. So there's a certain type of material they want us to be using. For every one of these we have to put receptacles. And if we put receptacles they need to be GFCI protected. Not only do they have to be GFCI protected, they have to be WRTR. Which is what? Weather resistant, tamper resistant or tamper proof. So there's there's specific guidelines that we have to follow. So when we build a teapole at our shop, bring it out to a job site and drop it in, we can't just call the power company, be like, all right, hook it up. We have to go through an inspection process. So we have to get that inspected either by the city or by the power company, depending again what exact area we're in. Sometimes we don't have to get inspected by a city, but we will just have the power company come out. They'll inspect it, look at everything and be like. Yeah, I feel safe putting this meter in there or they'll be like, Nah, you need to do this, this and this. Call us when you get that fixed and come out and we'll put the meter in. Once the meters in, though, you have power established to the property that everybody can use.
Segment 30:
Now once you've got power established, once the slab is actually set, it's cured for a little bit of time. So they actually let this thing dry out, they let the concrete set up and it has to go through a curing process. So they wait a little while for that to happen before they start piling weight and adding structure to. Home. But after all of that process is done, it's time for framing.
Segment 31:
So framing is the next big phase framing of a house can take. A few weeks. It can take a few months and it could take up to a year. It depends on the type of structure, how big it is, how many things have to happen, how many processes have to go, everything has to go through. There might be some environmental concerns. There might be jobs that get shut down because you built something too close to a tree, and that specific tree has a specific frog that eats a specific fly. And that specific fly is protected by a specific organization, like lots of things can happen, and especially on really big projects. This process can take a long time, and if a city comes and shuts your job down, it can be a while before nobody's allowed to go back out there and do anything before this job can progress again.
Segment 32:
But usually once you get through framing, there's one or two ways it'll go. Either the framers will be allowed to get a framing inspection, and then all of us mechanical, electrical, and plumbing MEP's can come in and begin doing our work, or some places they want you to have all of the MEP stuff installed. Before you can get an inspection and at that point that is when they do the framing inspection and the electrical and the mechanical HVAC, we call that mechanical and the plumbing inspection and they'll do all of them at once. So just again, kind of depends on your area, but once it's broken loose and the Mep's can come in, that is when we start the rough end stage.
Segment 33:
So this is after the prep work and the framing, all of the mechanical. Contractors, electrical contractors and plumbers, the MEPs will come in and do their rough ins. So a rough in is basically where we come in and prewire everything. We run everything through walls, through ceilings so that it can be covered up with drywall at a later date now typically. My rule of thumb is if we have plumbing that needs to be done, if we have HVAC that needs to be done. I like to wait until all of that stuff's done because I don't want to wire a bunch of stuff. And then some mechanical contractor comes through, cuts wires or like smashes our can out of the way to put up their air duct or a plumber, like run something through, you know, breaks our stuff in any way, damages our wiring system. I just don't want to mess with any of that. I know that I'm going to be a lot more careful. I'm going to be a lot more respectful of the other trades than a lot of other people are. So I like to wait till all that stuff's in so I know like OK, this is where everything needs to go. And if I have to do like a lighting layout in a ceiling, I want all of the ductwork done. I want all the vents set So that way if there's an issue I can tell the builder like hey I have all these lights. This is the only way these lights will layout because we have framing constraints to think about. So it's going to be much easier to move these two little vents. And push them over a little bit than it is to be able to like reengineer the framing just to get all of this lighting correct or deviate from the lighting plan so everything looks all goofy. So I just like to wait for the end. Then I like to come in and start doing all of my wiring.
Segment 34:
Now when you come in to do wiring, there's different stages that the framing can be in and it's OK. A lot of times, if the framing inspection didn't have to be complete for you to come in, they're going to do it after. You'll have a lot of things that are undone. You might have chases that are not finished being built. You might have some framing that's not completely finished. You might have stairwells that are being like custom built and a lot of these bigger homes that we do. So there's still a lot of framing that might not be done, but generally you should have all of the outside of the house wrapped so they'll have green board put up. They'll have a moisture barrier, which is usually like black plastic or it can be a bunch of different colors, but it's just this kind of like plastic paper stuff that acts as a moisture barrier, and they wrap the entire house with it so that moisture doesn't seep into the wood when it rains. But typically all that stuff's gonna be done a lot of times. You'll have the windows already put in. Maybe not all of them, but most of them. Probably won't have any exterior doors put in. Usually it's just the windows that they do at this point, so you can you may or may not have those things done. It shouldn't really matter for your wiring either way. The only thing that would matter is making sure that there's some kind of exterior, because a lot of times we have to cut in boxes to put in the exterior or they're going to have to put brick. On the building. So we have to get things stubbed out so that the brick layers can come through next and start setting things with accordingly. So if you don't have the exterior wrap of the house, that's another thing where I wouldn't go and start wiring anything, I would just wait until they've got all of that done. Then once you've gotten all of your wires in the walls and all your ducts done and all the plumbing done, each one of the contractors is gonna have to call for an inspection. So this is a rough in inspection. So you'll have a plumbing rough in inspection, an electrical rough inspection. And the insector's going to come out and justice. Make sure everything is wired to code. You didn't overfill all of your boxes. You didn't do anything that could cause any hazard, any fire. Things are protected. And once. Drywall gets put up or any kind of finish material gets put up, nothing's going to be damaged by the installation of that stuff. So a lot of times we'll have to have like nail plates that we have to put on because we've drilled holes a little bit too close to the front. And you know, when somebody's putting drywall up, they might put a drywall screw through one of our conductors. So little things like that and inspectors just walking around thinking about the entire job and whether or not your install is safe and whether or not people or equipment are going to be safe.
Segment 35:
Once your install is covered up and it can't be accessed anymore, then once all of the MEP rough inspections have been passed, the next thing they do is start putting drywall up. So they bring a whole bunch of drywall into the building. They start putting it up everywhere they're going to tape and mud or tape and float the whole entire place. And then usually they'll spray texture to make the texture, you know, appear as it appears on the walls. But most of the time, they're not going to start painting that until later. Once everything is textured, then they tend to bring all of the cabinets and doors in and they start putting all the cabinets and doors in. The reason they don't paint is because most of the time, once you start bringing things in and trying to hang cabinets, you're punching in walls. You can't, like cut things, Shim things, break things, scuff up walls. There's no reason to paint, because at that point, once texture is applied, you can go through and kind of cover over something and patch a lot and then retexture and get the. Texture to kind of match still, because you haven't even applied any paint yet. So typically you're going to have your drywall, your tape and float your texture. Then you're going to have your cabinets and your doors put in and then you're going to have paint happen. Now sometimes that's not the case. Sometimes they'll paint before they put doors in because they don't want to have to tape off every single door through the entire place. And they don't want to risk any of the doors getting painted. So sometimes they will wait and they'll do all of the door jams. They'll paint, they'll do everything finished, and then they'll come and put in all of the doors into the door jams. Just kind of a matter of preference with that. Then once you have all of the finished cabinets, a lot of times you'll have to spray like a lacquer or you'll have to paint or do something with the cabinets. Once all of that is done, then they typically bring the painters in and the painters will do like a final finish. They'll do a first initial primer coat throughout the whole place, and then they'll add another. Another coat of paint, they'll usually spray on whatever the color the walls are going to be. They might do one or two runs through the entire building to make sure that the finished paint is ready. And at that point they will usually call the Mep's back out and say now it's ready for the trim out phase.
Segment 36:
So the trim out phase is the last kind of section or the last segment of construction and that's when we will take all of our actual devices. We'll bring boxes full of materials. We've got receptacles, we've got light switches, we got recessed can trims, we got our panels and all of our Breakers, our service, everything that we're going to trim out and every outlet box everywhere gets a device and we're actually trimming or putting the trims in for everything. That's why they call it trim out at this phase.
Segment 37:
The plumbers will come into, usually after we've done all of our electrical, but it kind of depends. It can be either or Sometimes it's going to be right on top of each other. You're left. HVAC people out there and plumbers and electrical working on top of each other ****** *** at each other, ****** *** at the builder because he didn't think to schedule correctly and give each one of us kind of an allotted time to just take over the whole space without having to worry about other people being in our way. Cuz a lot of times plumbers will take up like a whole bathroom and then we can't do anything in that bathroom and so we have to wait. Until they're all finished with that. So if you have multiple plumbers working on multiple bathrooms and kitchen at the same time, and then you a whole bunch of electricians that are in there trying to do all of this stuff at the same time. And you have A/C company up there trying to put all of their ducts and their vent work and everything in place. It's just too much to make sure that you're not scheduling people on top of each other if you are in control of the schedule.
Segment 38:
Now during the electrical trim out, we're going to also install the electrical service. Most of the time you're going to have electrical service panel outside, a meter outside some. A kind of overhead service where conductors are coming in and going down into the meter. You might have an underground service where you have to have the utility company open up a transformer, open up a manhole where they're going to pull wire to it and then you got to pull wire into the panel. But all of that is like a separate kind of project than the trim out itself. So in Austin, we actually have to get a service inspection or a service only inspection where we can build the service. The whole house doesn't even need to be trimmed out yet. It could still just be drywall. You know, paint all or like drywall and like cabinets going in. Doesn't matter, but we can at least get the. Permanent power brought to the building. So that is one inspection. So we'd have to go out and build the service, make sure everything is grounded and bonded properly. We've got GFCI protection and arc fault protection or dual function for everywhere that we have to have that. Make sure that the meter, you know that all of that's bonded the exact same money, that we don't have a floating neutral, that we've got our bushings on all the crazy stuff. So we do all of that, then we call in, get an inspection, city inspector will usually come out. So this is not the power company that's inspecting it this. This is the actual city that you've pulled your permit through. So they're going to come through and do a service inspection. They're going to give you a red tag if you have any corrections and they want you to fix them. And then you're going to have to call them back and come out to look at them again a different day. Or if you got a green tag because you knew what you were doing, then you get a green tag. And then you or the inspector or the GC, the general contractor or the customer, somebody will end up calling in and saying, hey. We passed our final inspection, so now we just need to get a meter set. So they have to call the power company to bring a meter out and energize that meter. A lot of times they'll take it off the T pole that you had, providing temporary power and they will just move it to the house and then you pull your T pole out and you go down the road.
Segment 39:
Now mind you, this is still before you have any of the rest of the devices on the inside of the house hooked up, so you have to be careful. Some jurisdictions will make sure that you go through and wire nut everything off, or that you land everything in all of the panels in such a way that you're not going to be able to energize any of the conductors because now you just got all like wires sticking out everywhere throughout the house. So there's a little bit of like logic that you have to go through with this situation, but there also might be your AHJ, your authority having jurisdiction. There might be specific ways that you want to do it. So typically when I go do a trim out, I do all of it at once. I will bring all my service materials out. I'll bring all my, you know, receptacles, my switches, my plates, all of that stuff and I'll just start ripping through the house and once I've gotten all of it done, I'll call both inspections in. So I'll have the inspector come out and while he's there, I will say, hey, will you please do a service inspection and a final inspection, final meaning everything's done. There are some jurisdictions that are going to want you to have the power on for them to inspect and do a final inspection because they want to flip light switches on. They want the whole building working so that they can truly do a final inspection that makes sure everything works and they're going to stick their plug tester and they're going to trip. You know, the GFCI circuits make sure that everything's GFCI protected. Other jurisdictions might not do that. Other jurisdictions might give you a final without there actually being power turned on. So they'll give you the thumbs up, Everything looks great, you've got all your plugs, everything's installed, and they'll give you a final before that service inspection is finished. So it just kind of again, depends on what areas you're in. Most of the time, though, an inspector's going to want to look at a completed install. Everything in, they're going to want to turn things on. A plumbing inspectors going to want to turn faucets on, make sure water's running, it's final, it's inspected, it's ready.
Segment 40:
Then the last thing you're going to do is you're going to get a certificate of occupancy to be able to move somebody into the place. So A/C, EO or a certificate of occupancy inspection is usually somebody that's a building inspector or it could be a fire marshal. There's a couple different people that are in charge of doing CEO's. But a Co building inspector is going to come in and they're going to test everything and they're going to inspect everything that doesn't need specific inspections. So they're not going to redo your electrical final, they're not going to redo the plumbing final. All that stuff's already been done, but they're going to go through everything and they're going to look and if there's anything that they see, they're going to make you fix it before they give you your certificate of occupancy. So a lot of times they're looking for things that aren't in electrical code for us, so like smoke detectors, but we still wire smoke detectors. But there's not anything in the electrical code about smoke detectors that's in the building code, not the electrical code, but you know, things like that, just making sure that a place is ready 100% for a family to move in and live there. And then once you get the Co, you're good to go. You can start moving people in and get your money and get on down the road to the next job.
Segment 41:
Now if you want to see how I do roughens, I have a video. Right here where you can watch how I will rough in a receptacle and make it ready so that drywall can be applied and I can go put a device in it at a later point. If you want to watch how I do switches, this is a different video you can click on to watch how I rough in my switches. Love you crazy people. Thanks for watching and I'll see you in the next one.
Segment 42:
Put it on your angle. Make sure that you you've got to wait there because now what you can do is you're going to hammer at an angle and for the for the video you're going to hammer like that. Make sure that your metal is flatten the angle hammer at an angle like this, not like that. And by doing this obviously not talking much less working much harder you can now see. I'm driving the metal in like this OK You can see the angle as I'm driving the metal in the metal is flaring out, so I'm going to put it down on the side. And then Jenk coherse it back into eight more like yes, this is 8/1 of me. Just take this stock while they're working right now obviously the angle is dirty. It's my turn to go and hammer again. The heat, the the the metal is right up to temperature again. Basically first thing I'm going to clean my angle off. This is fire still that's left on the anchors have a session of What I want to do is I want to get rid of all of this. OK, I'm just wiping off my hand. The reason I'm getting rid of this is if I put some back. I put some back. There we go. I now go and place my my metal on top of this and I hammer in all this. The metal that I'm driving down is hot and softer than the hand of the face. This is cold, It's slag, it's fire skill. It's hot, harder than the actual metal itself. So this will impregnate itself in the metal. OK, when I actually come to cleaning, grinding, finishing polishing my blade, you'll all of a sudden notice all these little pick Marks and you're still. You can't figure out where they come from, that's from that. So make sure that your handle is clean before you start work.
Segment 43:
As we're going along, I will talk about forging safety and what you should take care of. But strike was the line is hot, is the same, and once again you can see it clear off. So we take care of that. And if you notice as I'm hammering, you'll see the spot where I'm hammering is actually high for fighting. Lighting up. There's friction OK, but my metal is already cold. I'm not going to continue working any further. I clean off the angle. There we go. The hammer will be using one more session. OK, this one here is 1. 5 kilogram engineering crossbean hammer. And obviously as soon as I get closer to the angle or to the top there, I'm afraid I'm going to be hammering my angle so I'm moving my metal over the edge. And I'm driving it down, squaring this up again.
Segment 44:
And now you'll notice and I'm going to zoom in that the end leaked the tip of my steel there as I had it over the edge, OK. And I'm driving it down and it's also cutting it around that, but I'm going to overemphasize that thing, which is just a little trick from getting that that tip. Nice. We know when we come to joint, just talk about hammers, all engineering, crossings, different weights, right?
Segment 45:
We started off working with a 1. 5 kilograms. OK, this is the beast of my shop and he works, does all the grunt work. But as soon as you you've now seen in the video that as soon as the metal starts and you you've got that tip, the chance for you hammering your anvil OK, as opposed to the metal. Is increases as as the tuck actually decreases. So we start working over the edge of the hammer. Now you can continue working with the heavy hammer and we'll do that trick. The second thing is you can continue working with your metal like this if you take a smaller hammer, this being a 1 kilogram. OK, with that aside, the baby that does the most work in my shop is an 800 gram. Now you can see this one has taken a lot of work. A lot of beating. This is an 800 gram. If you can only afford one hammer, this is it. Okay. So now I am going to be working with an 800 gram. So stepping over, getting my metal out, Okay and I said that what we're going to do is let me zoom in here so you can actually see what I'm doing. Okay, I'm lipping the metal over the tip of the handle then forging down. On and here making sure not to hit my there we go. Now you can see the law protrusion. If I'm not hammer this back you can see the formation of the So that's a quick one and obviously not going to try to flatten this 800 gram. That's why I've got 1. 5. OK, now you can see the tip is all nicely formed already. OK a couple of small blows on the side, couple of small blows on that side. We'll actually clean that up very, very nicely. But the OK, so now back to this one. Let me just zoom back in and obviously you'll see me whenever I am not working mostly I'm not letting the rest on the and and was heat sink and it's actually pulling the heat up. So what I want to do is I just want to finish up. That section there. OK and then finish it up. Just making this look tad meter. OK now cropping down to a smaller hammer. When I get to the close work, you'll notice how I'm holding my hammer. I'm choking the hammer completely to get more control over what I'm doing. OK, my thumb is not on top of it. It's just to the side to get more control. And now that's it. You're working with a forge, right?
Segment 46:
Your first forge has got a lid and your coffee gets cold. And if you watched some of my previous videos, you'll notice that I use 10 mugs in my swan. All right now with candy with that 10 mug as opposed to a ceramic mug, you can put it on top. The forge to heat up your coffee. Brilliant, brilliant. The amount of workshops that brought to you by Neil's phone about, But so now there's my piece of steel. That's what we're aiming for. OK, but round at the top.
Segment 47:
OK, now the next step is to decide how long my blade is going to be on this night. We know I want it run about 100 muls, so I'm just going to notch it. I'm giving myself a visual indicator as to where #1 to do my heat treat, My heat treat to actually heat it up. Let me just zoom in here so you can actually see the little notch there. Now you can see the notch. I'm just going to highlight it with the chalk. If I can do the single line, I'm going to be even better. So there I've decided how long my cutting edge is going to be. And this is the cutting edge. Not that we'll get to that, to the latest stage. Well, they actually see what happens. Cutting edge, notch it, I'll put it on the side of the anvil, put an anvil there and give it away at the top.
Segment 48:
Now what I'm going to do is I'm going to heat up this section here. I don't want to heat up that. I don't want to heat up this. I don't want to heat up where I'm working. When I'm going to come back out, I'm going to take that notch, add it at a 45 degree angle, that being 90 to my handball surface, OK, 45 degrees slanted forward on my blade. You can see the run out of the budge cut going to be in there. That will not sit here. I am then going to focus on those right there to now start throwing up the heel of it. OK, but now for my Basically I explained to you what you're going to do is you're going to work on the flat side, get the knots and you created nice degrees on the edge of the handle. Then tilt it at a 45 degree angle. Your hammer is now not going to face down flat, you're going to tilt it at an angle, readjust your handle. So you've got this. In other words, I don't want you to twist your hand, I want you to readjust the hand. That I have a an angle process with me. Get it up there and then on that spot do a blow. Do a blow. Same spot every single time and it works better if you didn't spot. As you see. Is dividing this up there and then off in your steel. You do not want to hit up there and you do not want to hit that here. Reason is that when you eventually grind in your run out or your punch coat which will then sit here and go put you on the other side if I now hammer anywhere. Let's do a little frowny place. You do not want to have it there. OK, easy as that.
Segment 49:
All right, so let's get cracking on each other. This thing again, so you can actually see what I'm doing. Done 1. 5 on the edge. Finding the same what I had before with me and I'm working just this little edge here my concern over my lines. Up to my desired and thickness all right and thickness from April down minus about two 2. 2 at this point point in time, which is about 10. See that I told my sentence is not anything smaller than three more, but I'm going to work up. And you know the camera, so it doesn't help. Now I'm just going to work up. But cool. In other words, where my blows are now falling. When my penis blows were there, my blows are now falling just next to it. To draw this out to the same thickness. OK, if I do other angles so you can actually see what I'm doing. I want to get this parallel, so if I draw an angle, I want to do that.
Segment 50:
OK by hammering right there. And I can force this metal out once again, being constant. I can't stress this enough. Making sure that you do not have a over or over that. OK, what the other side look like because of the handle is there, it's not going over off. But because I'm not forcing the metal down over often, there's a lot of placements that will tell you that you constantly need to swap the metal around. In other words, hammer on this side, purple around, hammer on that side. Around. Come on, that's hard to keep your edge in the middle. Now, you haven't seen me do that because it's not necessary, because you'll see the edges in the middle. OK, Why? Because black magic? No, just be conscious of what you're doing, how you're holding the steel and making sure that your your bar. And in this case, what we've done is take up your stock wall while that they handle to it. Okay that that bar is when you've got your metal from the angle, making sure that that and grips it perfectly tight, and then wedge it to your side to make sure that your metal don't move. If your metal doesn't move and you've got a flat on the angle, you will force it halfway through. If it's a proper angle, okay. The forces that you exert on the angle will actually hammer back okay, therefore creating the same term. Run out, run out, plunge, cut, heel skirts so I can mention I've got longer than a 45 degree angle. I can now open up, get more comfortable while I'm having, and work on luggage. Obviously I'm working on a section, then I'm moving forward. I've been waiting nearly. I've got to go over the place, finish this section and move on. Wow. And don't heat your angle. That's the second Brecon corner. See, this is what happens when you drive to show off. OK, air drive up the same you can see there. I've got thicker, so I need to just focus my blow up right there, get that edge up all the way to the front and heat it up. But worse, of course I've still had steel or heater. My steel. OK. And now you will notice with my edge and let me just zoom in here that my edge have fallen over to the one side. Okay. So just get my all important pointer. My edge is now farther like this here very nicely. My edge has now fallen over to the one side because I've only hammered it on the side so you can see the proper reach light. OK. And it is sits at an angle like this where that surface there is flat. So my next heat, I'm just going to spend getting this the muddle again.
Segment 51:
All right, done do. I've got down to my 800 grams because I don't want to. I just want to move the metal. I don't want to move the metal. I just want to shift it. And you can see I'm not putting a lot of effort into this. And there we go. My edge sits in the middle. OK, and there we go, man. So everything is nice and straight. All I'm going to do now is once again, like I mentioned, the drive. Let's start to go to flat spine. Put up my inch again. Hey, run a little to be here, OK?And all I'm doing now is I'm working on specificness and abstractness of my edge. Doing it quickly, spending too much time thinking about it. Just needs to. OK, so now you just zoom in here quickly. We want to get rid of the little bulge I've got at the top pointer. So this little bulge here, I want to get rid of that. OK, so I'll do that while putting it on there and then working my edge, Working my edge down. OK, putting it down there and working that. I'm doing this because keep in mind what I said, as soon as I hit you there, it's back. So by tilting my knife, I'm getting, I'm straightening my Ajax and I'm getting rid of the bolts on the top, creating. And that's all documents. OK, all righty. Now you'll notice that my knife isn't straight. Soft flows just to straighten the metal. I don't want to dent the metal. I want to do with this. I want to, you'll notice that thickness there, OK, the thickness in the tip, the where the bulge was and I'm going to be moving that up.
Segment 52:
Basically what we're going to do on this run is sort out this, this taper, so from people through to just a standard taper and you never want to hammer that taper more than halfway. And I'm now working that tape limit so that it is flat from there right view to the top and you can see my chalk is not touching the spine yet so I can see the highlight there for the highlight the fridge so I can get rid off and everyone off there is a focus blow and I'm not going to charm this. I'm checking that's better. All right. So I'm going to heat it here, but one more heat and then salt out of that tanker off my blade is a nice, nice sweater. Correct. And I'm going to actually be over this way. OK. Thank you very much. You don't have to do it this way because you guys are to the shop works like an absolute child. I am going to use chunky because I don't want to waste my own time. OK. I'm that up. I'm that up. Get it flat. What I want to do, doesn't matter how you do it, is just move. Ah, don't do that. Done. That was one technique. You can see the potential flaw in that technique. Second technique is now getting rid of that little straw ***** there hammering with the spine. OK, and now you can see I'm doing that. There's a lot safer OK Also, if you've got an angle, one of the shoulders should be rounded. Use that to your advantage, OK?By moving to metal ground, I'm now using the angle as the hammer. You can also use the Crosby. Off your camera, I'm not too worried about that curvature because we are going to go to the grinder and we're going to grind it away, but if you want to end up with that type of thing on your plate, that's how you do it. You can also then clamp this into a vice, holding it up with that and then hammering with the crossing in there to play that. If that's what you're going for, I am not. So I'm driving that down and obviously that's a little quicker. If you're a couple of things I need to obviously clean up. So I could use the top of my horn there. OK, just re emphasize that your horn. I can then also go back to my bar, put it on there and sort it out like that, but.
Segment 53:
I want to do. Our next step is to heat up. Yeah, OK, And then start hammering to create a taper as well. All right, why do we taper the handle?We don't have to. We taper the handle purely to remove weight from the handle to make it more balanced in the hand. I'm back onto my 1. 5 kilogram because the one I do because I want to stretch the start, I'm going to use the frost speed. OK. And once again, be careful of the nether regions, OK?Crosby spreads the metal in 180 degrees and a soft crack and actually start hammering while lengthening the steel. It is also thinning out. So when I go to the flag face, OK, you can see my make this look done. So. Talking, all I want to do is I then want to get rid the marks that I've got to be in there and in doing that I have already created. A bit taper, Okay. Now you'll notice that I've put more effort in down here than I did up there consciously, because I put in more effort up there. One minute create just a little flat bottle and I want to create the taper on the faces on the tape, Okay. So I've got a very crude taper at the moment. If I highlight this on that side and on that side, you can actually see the results much better. I focus my overflows up here. OK, you can still see remnants of my cross feeding with a lighter hammer. I'll now go and workout and get this taper close and flat and then make sure that it sits in the center of my mind. Once again, working. Sorry.
Segment 54:
So just a nice correction, take that up in particular, as you can see, I'm not trying to hit it so that I've moved, but I can't. Because. What I want is my knife that handle the box until I've got OK excellent. So what I'm doing is I'm just straighten my knife. My material resembles at night but it's not the knife yet. OK, so it's just nice and straight and we get to the mouth So what it was just to straighten everything on the. Everything nicely in line and I have to decide what I want to do now. I want to give the sniper a slight curve. A couple of ways to do this. Put it over there, the camera is there and then you feel the shock in your hand at the back. Alternatively you can lie it using the shoulder here and that's up there. Put it on there and hammer it here and by forcing the metal down door automatically creates a curve. Keeping in mind that that shoulder there, that shoulder there, or even just those two there will leave dense marks in your metal. OK, so heat up where you want it to bend and don't put hot metal on that surface. They put forth the neck, not there. Like I mentioned that I can use that area there, that shoulder there, or that there, putting it on there using my tag at the back. You then go and move the metal and I'm just maybe go straight on the camera at the moment and note so putting it down there and then hammering in Christ here and you'll see the patruning curves are created. Carrying on with that you'll see exchange the curve making a. Of the shoulder of the cutting circle of the animal actually caused an alternative way to do this, just finding two pieces of scrap metal. Buying it down there, putting your knife on top of it, and obviously now if you have it here you'll see that's going to push down once again back there. When contacts, your blade at the back might cause a thing or a dent. Be careful and rather make sure that you only keep the area that you want to bend that where your blade or your knife material then contacts, but it still doesn't cause a dent. Nice thing about this. The spacing again, crease or decrease the spacing. OK, so now all I'm doing is I'm just cleaning up everything so I can see my edges and I can see and it's gone skewed. So now I'm going to spend some time not hammering the steel but just straightening up. You'll see my edge file over to the one side again. So I'm sorting that out. I'm making sure that everything from the tuck the heel. And the the the end of the tank, the back of my knot is actually in the library, thank you very much.
Segment 55:
And the same tip, the scent of my spine plus the tail is in the one from the back. OK. See everything straight. And now I'm going to go through my normalizing cycle. Now what normalizing is, is because you have it all the steel. OK, what you have it. You've placed a load of pocket stress models in the steel itself by eating the steel up. Consistent color, therefore consistent temperature. OK, we just want to go just about nonmagnetic. Not a yellow hot, just a dark or a deep red. But use the magnet. Don't try to judge the color depending on what time of day. In the country, and I'm talking South Africa, where I'm down at the coast, where I'm up in Jova Highlands. When I'm up in Belfast, morning, afternoon and evening will have an effect on the color that you see. So your idea of what a cherry red is, my idea of what a cherry red is, and people will be standing next to this idea of cherry red. It's different. Learn to judge the temperature based on what the magnet tells you, the magnet. You, the carbon steel will lose its magnetism. That's 725 degrees Celsius, OK, which is where we're aiming to get same color right through. We're going to put it down, so let it air cool by itself. It's going to cool down. It's going to take about 25 to 30 minutes to cool down to the touch. As soon as you can pick it up, hold onto it without screaming like a nine year old girl or leaving any of your skin on the actual metal, then we're going to do it again. And we're then going to do it the third time. The. OK, the chances of your ongoing skill or bending or anything like that is drastic prediction. What I want to do now is you come out and look at my your notice that my covering does this. OK, what I want to do is I want to create that surface like that. Yeah, so I need to get. It's nice and smooth. So I'm obviously going to do the point that I need to get ripped, OK?So taking a Hummer and doing what I'm doing this morning quickly that is. Think of the pots Okay. So that's why I said don't worry too much about the overall collector, so that just get everything right. When you have this stage now you can start working on the profile again to make it look like the knife that you want to present. Obviously taking into consideration we are going to be going to a grinder and we are going to clean this off. Now as a bladesmith, you would want to forge this thing to at least an 80% completion. We're currently at about a 70% if I sort the handle out. So I'm going to cut this off and then I'll wash my handle this way out, maybe do a slight something there. Not 100% sure I would want to put a hole there and then obviously * ***** for my pitting material and as we are going to be putting handles on this, so thinking that you can go and forge in it alright. But what we'll rather do is just cut it off and then and then grind. So according to me this blade is about 7% done.
Segment 56:
OK and for me that's good enough. It's up there you can see I can with the hammer just going to sort it out just one heat and that will be sorted white. Just touch it on the ground and problem solved. This is as a bladesmith you need to make your. As opposed to I'm going to spend and burn out X amount of gas money wise and then finishing all of these things off. Or you can just go to a grinder and just take that off time. Now while you are still practicing the techniques, it's brilliant to actually go and hammer that it. Take a small hammer, I suggest a 600 gram, even a 400 gram little hammer and then going in and you can clean up this. Really, really nice. But as I make math for a living, this is where I forge and this if I start and I don't teach class and I shut up and I actually get to do the job, this year should not take you more than 40 minutes. That's if you take it there in a two hour and a half turn. If you want to do this, you spend more than 1/2 an hour doing this. You actually. All right, good enough of that. That's what you want. Everything nice and straight and as it cools down you can see that it is pulling a bit. It slows around, OK, and now I'm going to heat it up non magnetic all the way through and I'm going to put it on the drying rack. I'm actually going to tilt up the camera. So. See what I'm doing on the forge?At the forge, you can actually look at the temperature. It's unlike the Bowie where we put the flats on it to make sure that everything is not yeah, OK, that's what I need to read the size and practice the techniques that we learned yesterday. It's all getting tapers done. Everything's got enough making in place, everything's. Take to the edge, take to the top, take to the tank. Yeah, aim. Now there's to heat up the mud from the tank right through to the top. Everything not magnetic. So here we've got a magnet. OK, there's not a trick magnet. There, you can see that it's not magnetic, it's not sticking. But there it's sticking and that should be fitting. There, it's sticking. There it's not sticking. So that's how you determine what is not magnetic. So you're not going to be eating up the metal up to that color, which is yellow. Orange, OK, it's not red. So what you're going to be doing now, I'll see that one of the breaks for hope already. You are just going to in and out of the porch, in and out of the porch, eating up the thickest part.
Segment 57:
Hey guys, Chris Fix here and today I'm going to show you how to change the oil in your car or truck. This video is specifically geared to beginners who have never done an oil change. So this is going to be an indepth video and after watching it you'll be able to change your own oil. Many inexpensive oil change shops will use cheap oil and really cheap filters. So by doing an oil change yourself you could use good motor oil, a good filter, and know the job is getting done right. Plus you get to save some money and it's fun to work on your own car. If you've ever done oil changes before and want to share your tips, leave a comment. Now let's take a look at the tools you need to change your oil. So here's everything you're going to need to change your oil. You can see we're just using common hand tools. We have a socket set that has a ratchet and some sockets gloves so you don't get the oil on your skin because oil is not good for you. Paper towels to clean up. We have our oil and filter and I'll explain in a second how to find the correct oil and the correct filter for your car. We have an oil filter wrench. You might need it or you might not, but it's worth the have just in case. We have an oil catch pan so you can recycle your old oil, and a funnel so you can fill up your engine with new oil. I'm also including a breakup bar just in case your drain bolt is hard to get off. This will make it really easy. In addition to tools to change the oil, you're also going to need something to Jack your vehicle up. In this case, we have ramps, or you could use Jack and Jack stands and then a piece of wood to block off the rear tires and I'll show you everything. There's also another method you could use where you don't need any of this. You could just drive your vehicle up onto the curb to get enough access to safely get underneath and drain the oil. So you could use whatever method works for you. I just want to note also that any tools that I'm using here including the jacks, Jack stands, ramps and even the oil, check the description. I'll link everything so if you don't have something you could easily find it and you can easily see what I used. And as always, if you have any questions throughout this process, leave a comment below and I answer every question and comment. So by the end of this video you'll be an oil change expert. So let's go take a trip to the store and let me show you how to find out what oil your car takes.
Segment 58:
To figure out what oil your car takes, you can look in the owner's manual. So just go grab your owner's manual. We're going to flip to the back. Here you look under oil and capacities. You can see it tells you how much oil you're going to need. So we're going to need 4 1/4 quarts. And then you want to check the viscosity of the oil that you need. And we're going to need 4 1/4 quarts of 0 W 20. So let's go to the store and we'll check that out right now. All right, we're in the store and we need to find a synthetic. 0 W 20 oil. There's a ton of oil to choose from. Here is 0 W 20. You can see. Here's where the viscosities are listed. 0 W 20 is right here. Here's 10W30, so make sure you get the correct viscosity. Here's the 0 W 20 we need. We want a full synthetic. We need at least 4 quarts, and this container has five, so that's plenty. If you have an older car, you might not need synthetic, but I personally like running synthetic oil even in my older cars. There are a lot of mitts out there on switching to synthetic. And just so that you know, you could switch to synthetic and you could switch back to conventional at any time. Conventional is cheaper. But on most new cars, you need to run, synthetic plus synthetic oil lasts longer. Speaking of how long oil lasts, change your oil at the recommended mileage that's listed in the owner's manual. Many cars have an oil life monitor that'll tell you when you need to change your oil, so just go by that. If you can't find any information on when you need to change your oil, I change the oil in my cars at around 5000 miles. My van has over 300, 000 miles and we've had that car since new and she's still running. Great okay. So we have our oil. Now let's go find the filter. There are tons of oil filters, but which one do you pick? Well, just look in the book here and we're doing the oil change on a 2014 Nissan Sentra. Personally, I like using Purolator filters, but any quality filter will do. We need an L 14612, OK, L 14612, L 14612 right here. Good. So there we go. We got the oil and the filter. I'm going to go check out real quick and let's go change the oil. All right. So now that we got our correct viscosity oil, 0 W 20, and we have the correct oil filter, let's get underneath this car. And I'm going to show you how to Jack the car up first. And then I'm going to use the ramps because that's what I prefer. So an oil change has three basic parts. One, you got to drain the oil. Two, you have to change the oil filter, and three, you have to fill it with the correct new oil. Let's go step by step so you know exactly what you need to do.
Segment 59:
The first step is to drain the oil. And to get to the oil drain plug, we have to go underneath the vehicle. So we're going to have to lift the vehicle up. To Jack the car up, if you're not completely sure how to do it, you could check the owner's manual. It tells you exactly how to Jack the car up to change your spare tire. But I'm going to show you right here what you need to do. And you want to make sure before you Jack the vehicle up, you block off the rear tire so the car doesn't roll. The other thing you want to do is if you have an automatic, make sure it's in park. If you have a manual, put it in first gear and also pull the emergency brake which will prevent the car from rolling. So get your Jack and place it underneath the vehicle. Right where your jacking points are. In this case, the jacking points have these little indents in them. That area of the frame is meant to support the vehicle, and then you could Jack the car up. Once the car is jacked up, you can get your Jack stands and place it under the car right where there's a big piece of metal on the frame, and then you're going to lower the car down until the Jack stands and then you have plenty of room. To get to the oil pan. So we'll just let the car down slowly and you can see the Jack stand is the only thing holding it up. And once your car is safely supported on the Jack stands, I always like to put the Jack right back on the frame just for extra support. So if for some reason the Jack stand slips or something or malfunctions. You have backup with the Jack. You can never be too safe. So that's how you Jack your car up to do an oil change.
Segment 60:
I want to show you the method that I prefer. It's a lot easier, a lot safer, and that's using ramps. Make sure you always use Jack stands and not just the Jack. You don't want to just rely on the Jack to protect you from the car falling on you like you saw. I like to use both. Double the protection now. Using ramps is my favorite method. It's easiest, it's the safest, and it also raises the vehicle pretty high. All you have to do is park the vehicle in a spot where you could slide 2 ramps right under the wheels and then you just drive the car off the ramps. It's that simple. Make sure that you pull the emergency brake again and we're blocking off the rear tires again. And I think you could get why I like the ramp so much before you go under the car. Even when you have the car jacked up. What you want to do is you want to just shake the car with your hand. The car should not move anywhere. You're just shaking it back and forth as hard as you can, and it should be stable. And this thing is stable. Once you know that the vehicle is safe to go under, you can see why I like using the ramps. Look at all this room that we have now. All right, so now let's go under the car and find the oil drain plug so you can see my feet over there. This is the front of the car right here. And then we're looking up here. And if we look here, you can see there's a bunch of stuff and you might be confused. Oh, where's the bolt that I need to undo?Where's the oil drain bolt? Well, what you want to do is you want to locate the drain pan. The drain pan is this right here. It's usually black and it has a bolt coming out. You can see the bolt right back here. That's your oil drain pan. Now, there's other things that look like it, but this should be pretty easy to find because you're looking for that bolt and you're looking for the black pan. But you could also see right here is another drain pan, but this drain pan here doesn't have any bolts. To let fluid out, this is the transmission drain pan. So really simple to find the oil drain pan and then actually you can see right behind the drain pan you want to locate your oil filter, in this case oil drain pan. Here oil filter is right behind it and it's up and down nice and easy to get to which is really good. In some vehicles the oil filter is actually on top of the engine, for example in this Toyota Tacoma you can see here. In this case though it's underneath, it's pretty easy to get to. This is really easy to get to. Also, you can see the drain plug right there. Let's go get it off.
Segment 61:
Now, before we remove the drain plug, get your oil collection pan, slide it under. Now we have a sideways view. You can see our filters right here. Our oil drain pan is right here and our oil drain plug is right there. We have our oil catch can right here. It's kind of aimed behind a little bit because the oil is going to come out that way.
Segment 62:
In this case, we're using a 14 millimeter socket on our ratchet. And to loosen, you want to go this way counterclockwise. Righty tighty lefty loosey. So this might be a problem some of you might encounter where you're using your normal sized ratchet. It's hard to get that drain plug out. Well, don't be discouraged. There's an easy trick to use, and that trick is to use one of these long breaker bars. You could see here how much longer it is than my ratchet. And this is going to give you so much leverage that's going to be really easy to get off. If you don't have a long breaker bar like this, you can get your ratchet and slip a pipe over the end to make it longer. Watch how easy this is going to be now boom, it's loosened. That's all it took. So now we can loosen this the rest of the way. Once it gets really loose, make sure your drain pan is ready to go and you can loosen this by hand. Now you can wait for all the oil to drain out.
Segment 63:
Now I should mention some people say you should change your oil after you run the car for like 10 minutes so the oil is warm and it flows easier. In reality it doesn't matter if you want to change your oil with the car sitting there, you just Jack it up and the car is cold. All that oil is going to be in the oil pan. You're not going to risk burning yourself and sometimes it just makes the job easier. Now if you're going to put your car up on the ramps, then you're starting your car anyway. Just make sure if you run your engine you let it sit for like 5 to 10 minutes, let it cool off a little bit so you don't burn yourself, and also so all the oil collects in the drain pan. On some oil drain plugs there's a gasket to help seal the plug and you can see here there's a copper crush gasket. These gaskets are generally one time use, so take off the old gasket and replace it with a new one. Some people reuse these gaskets one or two times and never have a problem with leaks, and I'm one of those people, but in general I suggest you replace the gasket. All right, the oil is completely drained. There are a few drops coming out, So let's screw in the drain plug and move on to the next step. Just screw it in by hand and it should tighten right up. I like to wipe away any extra oil before I tighten it down all the way so your drain pan stays clean. And so you know if there's any oil leaking from the drain plug down the road. Now, we want to tighten up our drain plug, and to do that we want to go clockwise. So we're going to switch this. So now we're going to tighten this clockwise and notice I'm using our ratchet and not our breaker bar. You want to use the small ratchet to tighten this. You're only tightening it so it's snug. You don't want it over tighten it. You over tighten it. You'll strip the drain plug and you'll cause way more problems. You have a washer on there. All you need to do is tighten it down to 20 foot pounds of torque, which is nothing. So use the small ratchet. Tighten it. And once it's snug, give it a little extra turn and that's it. So we just finished step one, removing all the old oil. Now Step 2 is changing the old oil filter.
Segment 64:
OK, so we should be able to get this off by hand. Nope, too tight. So if your oil filter is tight and it won't come off, we have four different style tools that you could use to get your oil filter off. This one's my favorite because it works for all different sizes. It's literally just a wrench. And it grabs on and then you could turn it, this one put in here. And then as you turn you can see it gets smaller. But you could see this is a really small filter. This is for actually a big 454 cubic inch engine. So the oil filter on that is huge. Here's another adjustable one. It's rubber. So it grabs on really tight. Just close it by pulling the rubber through here and then when you turn to loosen, you turn like this. And it kind of grips because it's turning on here and grabbing it. These are good because they're adjustable and they work on all different sizes. And the last style is this style, but you need it for each specific size that you use. But this is a really small filter, so you could see it won't work. But the idea is it's just like a giant socket for a filter and then you could put your wrench right in here just like that and then boom, comes right off. But we're going to be using this because it's easy to use quick grabs on all different size filters. So let's get this filter off. OK, you can see that does the trick. We can unscrew this the rest of the way by hand. Make sure your oil catch can is right below where this is, because this is going to leak oil, as you can see. There we go, just put that right in there.
Segment 65:
All right, so with our old filter out, we want to grab our new filter and I like to pre oil my filter. It prevents the car from running dry when you first start it up. So if you just put this filter in now and screw it in, there's no oil in here. So the oil has to fill this and then go to all the engine parts. But if we fill this first with our brand new oil, then we don't have to worry about the engine running dry and this is just going to give you a longer lasting engine. And I should also mention that not every car you're going to be able to pre fill these because some cars it's upside down or some cars it's in sideways. We just want to carefully fill this filter to the top just like that.
Segment 66:
Now what you want to do is you want to get oil around this gasket. You can see a little bit of oil got on the gasket just by chance, but you want to make sure you have a clean finger. Just get a little bit of oil and just put it right around this gasket. And what that's going to do is it's going to make it easier to come off next time you do this. And it's also going to prevent leaks. And that's all you need to do. Now let's go install it.
Segment 67:
So there's the drain pin. We go up and you look here and that's what the oil filter adapter looks like. And if we look there, you can see the oil filter screws right onto that middle stud there. So it screws in right there. And you just try to make it flush as you turn it. So if it's flat as you turn it, it should grab and you'll know when it grabs, you'll feel it. Don't force it, it should go on really easily. You can see there it's on. So now I just tighten it by hand. Don't use any tools to tighten these, just tighten it by hand. If your hands are slippery because it's oily, you grab a towel, clean it off and then turn it more by hand with the towel. Good. So step one is done. Step 2, changing the oil filter is done. Now let's get the car on the ground and do Step 3, which is adding new oil. So we're going to add the oil to the engine while we're on the ramps, just so that we make sure that we don't start the engine with no oil in it. And when you're looking for where you add your oil, it's usually at the top of the engine. Here's where you check your oil. You can see it says engine oil on here. And that's not where you fill it. Where you fill it is right up here. It has the oil sign. It's upside down, but it has the oil sign on here. And this is all dirty. So you don't want to just take this cap off. You want to clean the area first because you don't want that junk falling into the engine. So just get your paper towel, get in here and clean it. Good. Now that that's clean, we can take this cap off and we'll place our funnel right in here so we could fill the engine up with brand new oil. So on the side of our bottle, we have a scale here that tells you how many quarts or liters you have, and you want to do this on a level surface. But you can see we're pretty much full right now and we need to add 4 quarts. It was 4 1/4 quarts with the filter, but we added the oil to the filter so it's really just 4 quarts. So we want to have a quart left, which is right down here. I always have a towel ready just in case. I hate spilling oil on engine parts. Just a little top tip. If you pour it sideways like this, you actually have a little more control. Surprisingly, and usually the oil doesn't come out and blobs, it comes out nice and smooth instead. So if we look here we have about 1/2 a quart we need to add and looks like we're at about 1 quart. So I'm going to stop there. close that up.
Segment 68:
So we just finished the last step which is add oil. We have one more step to do and that is to get the car off the Jack stands or in this case the ramp on level grounds and check the oil. Since we added oil, we could start the car and you just want to make sure that there's no oil lights on and you can see the oil light isn't on. So that means the engine's getting oil now we could back the car down. And now that we have the car back down on level grounds, let's go check the oil. So shut the engine off. You want to let the engine sit for about 5 minutes so all the oil drops back down. Since we did start the engine, after you let it sit for 5 minutes, get a towel, pull your dipstick out and clean it off, Put it back in, make sure it's pushed down all the way, and then pull the dipstick back out. OK. If we look at the dipstick, what you're looking for is the oil. You can see the oils over here, there's low and there's high. So that dot right there means that the oils low and you need to fill it up.
Segment 69:
That dot right there means the oils high and it means that you have it completely full. Anywhere in between is good. I prefer trying to get it to the high. Now sometimes it's hard to see how much oils on here, especially this brand new oil. And especially the synthetic oil. So if you flip this over, you actually get a better look and you can see the oil goes right there. So we're right on the high, which is perfect. So we don't have to add oil or anything. If yours is too low, add a little bit of oil and check the level again. If you end up adding a little bit too much oil, that's not a big deal. If you add over a quart of extra oil, then you have a problem and you probably have to remove some of it because that could actually cause engine problems. And that is the complete guide to changing oil in your car or truck. Hopefully after this video you have no questions, but if you do have questions just comment below. I answer every comment and question. Also if you end up doing your first oil change after watching this video, definitely let me know because I love to hear that stuff. Hopefully this video is helpful. If it was, remember to give it a thumbs up up. On the screen are going to be other videos. You can find the links to those videos as well as any links to any tools that I used in this video in the description. The top tip for this video is. Well, where do I put all my oil that I drained out from my filter and from the car?And the answer to that is you want to dispose all of your oil responsibly. You can see here in the corner of my garage, I have all these old oil containers I really need to make an oil run. But what you do is you just fill up a container. It could be an old oil container, it could be a milk container, orange juice, whatever you have. And what you do is you just fill up these containers and you go to your local auto parts store, your local garage, your local recycle center, places that sell the. Oil. Like Walmart, most of those places will take the oil and they'll take it for free so that they could recycle it so it doesn't become an environmental hazard.
